Demystify transformative technologies. Decode tech topics with content crafted by IBM experts.

Learn how data mining combines statistics and artificial intelligence to analyze large data sets to discover meaningful insights and useful information.

Use a vector database for storing, managing and indexing huge quantities of high-dimensional vector data efficiently for generative AI use cases and applications.

Explore chatbot technology to understand how chatbots simulate human conversation, often using NLP to parse inputs and generative AI to automate responses.

Find out how a DDoS attack floods websites and other network resources with malicious traffic, disrupting normal activity and denying access to legitimate users.

Uncover and understand how phishing tricks users into divulging sensitive data, downloading malware, and exposing themselves or their organizations to cybercrime.

Study the basics to learn how this technology uses quantum mechanics to solve complex problems beyond classical computers’ capabilities and its potential to impact many industries.

Understand how AI enables computers to think and make decisions like humans, explore its history and the types of AI, and uncover the ways it impacts our lives.

Gain insight into how ML leverages data and algorithms, its use cases and associated concerns to empower responsible and innovative use of the technology.

Discover how deep learning simulates our brain, helping systems learn to identify and perform complex tasks with increasing accuracy unsupervised.

Learn about the k-nearest neighbors algorithm, one of the popular and simplest classification and regression classifiers used in machine learning today.

Dive into how NLP enables machines to understand and respond to text or voice data and learn about various NLP tasks to obtain optimal results.

Learn how neural networks allow programs to recognize patterns and solve common problems in artificial intelligence, machine learning and deep learning.

Know how to harness business data by understanding how business intelligence processes data to gain actionable insights and inform decision-making.

Master this analytics procedure to become skilled at generating predictions, using an easily interpreted mathematical formula and applying it to various domains.

Predict outcomes more quickly and make better decisions by mastering the logistic regression method and by knowing which type of logistic regression to use.

Learn how to run a Monte Carlo Simulation, a computational algorithm, by using repeated random sampling to estimate the possible outcomes of an uncertain event.

Know about exploratory data analysis to effectively analyze and summarize data sets, helping one to discover patterns and anomalies, and generate a hypothesis.

Leverage data science to unlock business insights from an increasing amount of data, accelerate digital transformation and data-driven decision making.

Master visual inspection of equipments to detect defects both in person and remotely using digital images to maintain quality and safety standards.

Implement preventive maintenance by combining regular maintenance tasks with ML, data analytics and predictive asset health monitoring to prevent downtime.

Enhance maintenance efforts with a computerized maintenance management system (CMMS) for efficient scheduling, managing, and tracking of maintenance tasks.

Explore how digital twins create a virtual copy of an object or system by integrating real-time data, simulation, ML and reasoning to support decision-making.

Learn field service management to effectively coordinate resources, employees and equipment, in work activities and operations off company property.

Explore what business automation is, why it matters and how you can put it to work for your organization.

Find out how intelligent automation combines AI and automation technologies, enabling automation of low-level tasks within your business.

Find out how BPM uses various methods to discover, model, analyze, measure, improve and optimize business strategy and processes.

Learn how process mining applies specialized algorithms to event log data to identify trends, patterns and details of how a process unfolds.

Learn how workflows can help you manage repetitive processes and tasks, which occur in a particular order.

Leverage digital transformation with Industry 4.0, delivering real-time decision making, enhanced productivity, flexibility and agility.

Learn about automating customer interactions with IVR, enabling callers to get or provide information or make voice requests without speaking to a live agent.

Learn about IoT which is a network of physical objects that are embedded with sensors, software and network connectivity, allowing them to collect and share data.

Create, design, deploy and support software through software development, covering a set of computer science activities.

Leverage supply chain management (SCM) to coordinate a business’ entire production flow, from sourcing materials to delivering an item.

Track inventory from manufacturers to warehouses and from these facilities to point of sale through effective inventory management.

Review compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act for financial reporting and transparency to prevent corporate fraud.

Manage governance and risks while maintaining compliance with industry and government regulations by implementing GRC strategies.

Learn how cloud computing lets you use infrastructure and applications online, without installing and maintaining them on premises.

Defend your organization with cloud security, leveraging procedures and technologies designed to address external and internal threats.

Use virtualization to maximize hardware efficiency to divide a single computer’s hardware resources into multiple virtual machines.

Learn about the three most popular types of cloud service offerings: IaaS, PaaS and SaaS, also sometimes referred to as cloud service models or cloud computing service models.

Save data and files in an off-site location with cloud storage, accessible through public internet or a dedicated private network connection.

Use hybrid cloud to combine and unify on-premises, private cloud and public cloud environments to create a single, flexible IT infrastructure.

Create an environment dedicated exclusively to a single customer with private cloud, offering cloud benefits along with on-premises security.

Find out how HPC uses powerful processors to process massive amounts of data and solve today’s most complex computing problems in real time or near-real time.

Understand how SaaS works as a software delivery model to reap the benefits like cloud computing, cost savings, scalability and accessibility via a web browser.

Learn how cloud computing enables access to intranet-based infrastructure and applications, eliminating on-site maintenance and enhancing agility and efficiency.

Learn Kubernetes—an open-source container orchestration platform—to manage and scale containerized applications, improve availability and reduce costs.

Explore what developers and IT leaders like about serverless computing, a simpler way to build and run cloud-native applications, paying only for what you use.

Learn how mainframes are able to process billions of calculations and transactions daily in real-time, with the highest levels of security and reliability.

Discover how NoSQL ,also referred to as “non-SQL”, enables the storage and querying of data outside the traditional structures found in relational databases.

Look into the CAP theorem that states a system can only deliver two of three key characteristics: consistency, availability, and partition tolerance.

Find out how database schema create definition and organization of data within a relational database and how it maintains data quality and integrity.

Learn more about etcd, the fault-tolerant open source key-value database that serves as the primary data backbone for Kubernetes and other distributed platform.

Use a relational database which provides a structured way to organize data in rows and columns that form a table, maintaining data consistency and integrity.

Learn how DevOps combines and automates software tasks to speed the delivery of high-quality software, and its synergy with site reliability engineering (SRE).

Automate the integration of security at every phase of the software development lifecycle, with DevSecOps, short for development, security, and operations.

See how software is developed and how it can help your business compete. Discover software development essentials, innovations and technologies.

Find software errors and verify that an application or system is fit for use, preventing bugs, reducing development costs and improving performance.

Find out how PaaS, or Platform-as-a-Service, provides a complete, flexible, and cost-effective cloud platform for developing, running, and managing applications.

Automate IT operations tasks that would otherwise be performed manually, accelerate software delivery, and minimize IT risk with site reliability engineering.

Enable data exchange through APIs, which define rules or protocols for communication between applications.

Optimize IT operations with AIOps, using analytics, artificial intelligence and other technologies to boost efficiency.

Evaluate and verify software or application performance through rigorous software testing.

Use operations data and software engineering to automate IT operations tasks, accelerate software delivery and minimize IT risk with SRE.

Gain deep visibility into modern distributed applications with observability, enabling faster, automated problem identification and resolution.

Automate the integration of security practices with DevSecOps, enhancing security at every phase of the software development lifecycle.

Examine how IT automation implements automated processes and software in place of time-consuming manual activities.

Explore how cloud automation implements tools and processes that reduce or eliminate the manual work of cloud provisioning, configuration and management.

Connect two or more computing devices through computer networking, enabling the transmission and exchange of information and resources.

Explore what mainframes are,  what are their benefits and how do they process billions of calculations and transactions in real time, securely and reliably.

Explore what a data center is, and how you can centralize IT infrastructure in a data center, housing applications and services in a secure way.

Learn about the differences between hard disk drives (HDDs) and solid-state drives (SDDs), and how these differences affect data access speed, performance and cost.

Power your devices with microprocessors, combining the components and function of a CPU into a single integrated circuit (IC), or a small number of connected Ics.

Use virtualization to maximize hardware efficiency to divide a single computer’s hardware resources unto multiple virtual machines.

Build your cloud infrastructure with cloud servers, which are the fundamental building blocks of cloud computing infrastructure.

Explore how Terraform, an open source “Infrastructure as Code” tool, allows programmers to build, change and version infrastructure safely and efficiently.

Build a strong IT infrastructure, combining components needed for the operation and management of enterprise IT services and IT environments.

Learn how middleware speeds development of distributed applications by simplifying connectivity between applications, components and backend data sources.

See how microservices architecture breaks down a monolithic application into smaller deployable services, enabling agility and scalability.

Gain an introductory understanding of mobile application development, which involves making software for smartphones, tablets and digital assistants.

Learn how Java Spring Boot simplifies development of web applications and microservices with an open-source framework referred to as the Java Spring Framework.

Separate applications into three logical and physical computing tiers, making it easy to maintain and scale each tier as needed without impacting the other tiers.

Use network security solutions to protect network infrastructure, resources and traffic from internal and external security threats and cyberattacks.

Understand how to distribute network traffic efficiently among servers to optimize application availability and maintain a positive end-user experience.

Explore the ways network operations centers help organizations maintain optimal performance and how AI plays a role in delivering more reliable network service.

Explore how virtual private clouds offer enterprises the ability to establish a private cloud-like experience within a public cloud infrastructure.

Learn how SDN as a network architecture enables network virtualization, greater flexibility and efficiency compared to traditional networking approaches.

Explore how a CDN, consisting of a network of geographically dispersed servers, improve customer satisfaction by optimizing website and mobile app performance.

Leverage quantum computing, a rapidly emerging technology, that harnesses the laws of quantum mechanics to solve problems too complex for classical computers.

Encrypt and transmit secure data with quantum cryptography, leveraging the naturally occurring and immutable laws of quantum mechanics.

Secure sensitive data, access and communications for the era of quantum computing with quantum-safe cryptography.

Encode data with a qubit, the basic unit of information in quantum computing, which serves as the quantum equivalent of the traditional bit in classical computers.

Leverage quantum-centric supercomputing to combine quantum and traditional high-performance computing (HPC), enabling solutions for complex real-world problems.

Understand how neuromorphic computing, also known as neuromorphic engineering, mimics the way the human brain works.

Explore how supercomputing uses high-performance computing systems to determine or calculate, reducing the overall time to a solution.

Stay informed about cybersecurity technology, types of threats and best practices to protect your critical systems and sensitive information from cyberattacks.

Learn how malware or “malicious software", such as ransomware, Trojan horses and spyware can harm computer systems or their users by compromising data security.

Discover how CAPTCHA , or "Completely Automated Public Turing Test” , authenticates users as humans to prevent threats posed by malicious bots.

Find out how SIEM software helps organizations recognize and address potential security threats and vulnerabilities before they disrupt business operations.

Secure your cloud environment with cloud security, a collection of procedures and technology, to address external and internal threats to business security.

Explore how an SOC unifies and coordinates all cybersecurity technologies and operations of an organization to improve threat detection, response and prevention.

Learn how inventory management involves the tracking of inventory from manufacturers to warehouses and from these facilities to a point of sale.

Understand how order management systems track orders from inception to fulfillment and manage the people, processes and data connected to the order.

Explore how energy management helps businesses proactively monitor, control and optimize energy consumption to converse use and reduce energy costs.

Learn how electronic data interchange (EDI) is used to exchange business information, saving time and eliminating costly errors caused by manual processing.

Facilitate secure, reliable and automated exchange of file-based data over the internet with managed file transfer (MFT) technology to meet compliance needs.

Find out how the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) seeks to keep investors better-informed about companies' climate-related risks.

Weekly insights, research and expert views on AI, security, cloud and more in the Think Newsletter

Elevate your understanding with our expert-led educational videos and YouTube playlists on the biggest topics and trends in tech. Master the basics, enhance your skill set or acquire real-world strategies for leveraging technology.

Explore our diverse podcast series, featuring expert discussions on top tech topics, real-world application of our products and a look at our culture of diversity, learning and agility.

